## **Zippy** ZK - A Basic Zero-Knowledge Protocol to Build Intuition on the Popular Proving Systems


Cryptographic systems are some of the most important tools devised to protect data and people. As our world evolves and accelerates, cryptography seems to only increase in relevance. A fairly new subset of cryptography that has steadily increased in popularity is zero-knowledge proofs: mathematical arguments that allow us to convince others about some property of our data without revealing what that data is. Originally discovered through research in the 1980s, zero-knowledge technology (zk, for short) research and development proliferated in the late 2010s, and has sustained growth through today.
While there is no shortage of great guides on the basics of zk proofs, there is a chasm between those guides, which mainly just focus on the concept of a zero-knowledge proof, and actually understanding how the proving systems of today verify computation. The learning curve goes from basic logical arguments, like partially covering a photograph or revealing colored paper within envelopes, straight to advanced algebra and number theory.
The proving systems of today bring together a few highly technical concepts in order to create zk proofs on computation. The main ingredients of popular proving systems primarily include execution traces, arithmetization, polynomial interpolation, constraints, and commitment schemes.
The aim of this guide is to bridge the gap between the basic guides and the advanced math, by providing an easy-to-understand proving system that utilizes all of the key concepts employed by the hard ones.
What is Zippy ZK?
Zippy ZK is a toy zero-knowledge proving system meant to provide a foundational intuition for how the popular ones work today. Zippy is incredibly limited relative to real zk-proving systems. It can only do one thing: prove to you that I know the 4th root of a number, without revealing what that 4th root is. The 4th root is my “secret number,” which could also be considered my program’s input, while the public number is the output of my program.
The general steps that Zippy ZK follows are:
Execute the computation
Line up the values generated by the computation into a table
Convert each cell in our table into a coordinate
Use the coordinates in your table to draw a curve
Validate that the curve satisfies a set of constraints
Commit to this curve
The steps are explained in detail below, and should not require anything more than middle school math to understand. Some aspects of Zippy are closest to a STARK, but at a high level the steps that are followed are the same general steps that are followed by both SNARKs and STARKs. If you understand this guide, you will be able to use that understanding to tackle the much more complicated, more specific system of your choice.

Step 1. Execute the computation
In zero-knowledge proving systems, the two parties involved are usually called the prover and the verifier. The prover is trying to convince the verifier about some fact. This fact may be something like the following: “I know a secret that has some property you care about.” In our case, the fact that the prover wants to prove is “I know the 4th root of some number.” In other cases, it might be: “I have an identification card that proves I am 18 or older.” The main purpose of a zero-knowledge protocol is to prove that fact without revealing anything else: the prover doesn’t need to reveal the 4th root to prove that they know it. I don’t need to show my ID card to prove I’m 18.
Moving away from the very general concept of what zk is, we can now target how it is implemented for real developer systems. The model that deployed zk platforms use, such as Noir, Circom, Cairo, and others, is one of computation: the prover executes a computer program, and then uses a zero-knowledge proof to convince a verifier that this computer program ran on some unknown secret inputs, and then produced outputs that are shared with them. The computer program may be anything! It can be a program that squares numbers, like we’ll be using in this guide, or a machine learning system that can detect features from images. Whatever the program is, the zero-knowledge proof ensures that the inputs and execution trace of that program are private, and only the results of that program are shared.
For this guide, the program we will be using can do one thing: calculate x^4 for some input x, by squaring x and then squaring x^2. It’s a very simple program. Our input to this program will be 2, and as you could guess, our output will be 2^4 = 16.
Now, back to zk proving. The first step in a proving system is to execute the program to get your outputs from your secret inputs. There’s nothing special here, just do the math. For example, with our secret number 2 and output 16, we have:
2*2 = 4,
4*4 = 16,
And you’re done. We have our final output 2^4 = 16, our secret input 2, and an intermediate value 4. The combination of all these values is known as the execution trace. While in this simple proving system, the execution trace is just a few multiplication results, in real proving systems it is often the execution of actual machine code: registers, memory addresses, and instructions from the computer’s instruction set being executed!

Step 2. Line up your intermediate values and output into a table
This step is really easy as well. Now that we’ve completed our computation and have an execution trace, we’re gonna create a table that contains the intermediate values and the output from Step 1:

Row Number
Values
1
2
2
4
3
16

The first column is just the row number, and the second column is our input (2), intermediate values (4), and output (16). The process of structuring an execution trace this way is known as arithmetization.
Popular proving systems will use arithmetizations that you may be familiar with: R1CS (Rank-1 constraint system), PLONK-ish arithmetization, and AIR constraints (for STARKs). Our arithmetization looks most like what you will see with STARKs. Really, though, all that these arithmetization systems do is just convert an execution trace to a tabular format.

Step 3. Convert each cell in our table into a coordinate
The above table from Step 2 has cells. For example, “16” is the value of the 3rd row in the 2nd column. Anyone familiar with Excel should be familiar with a cell.
Now, we can alter the table we made in Step 2: we can get rid of the “Row Number” column, and turn each cell into a coordinate, with the x-coordinate representing the row number and the y-coordinate representing the original value. For example, the “16” cell becomes (3, 16), since it’s in the 3rd row. Here is our updated table:

Values
(1, 2)
(2, 4)
(3, 16)

This step is more of a conceptual shift rather than something tangible, and it may seem like a bizarre thing to do. The important intuition here is that any set of data can actually be turned into points. If you have some list of values, say:
\[1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000\]
Those items in the list can be represented as points:
\[(1, 1), (2, 10), (3, 100), (4, 1000), (5, 10000)\]
Your x-value of the point is just the index of that point in the list (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and the y-value is the actual original value (1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000). The idea of converting data from its raw form into points, and then doing things with those points, was originally pioneered in Reed-Solomon encoding. You may not know it, but this technique is present in all kinds of technologies you use: DVDs, Blu-ray, QR codes, barcodes, text messages, video streaming, the list goes on… It also happens to be very useful for cryptography and zk proofs, as we’ll see.

Step 4. Convert the points in your column to a function
This is where we start to do weird things. But don’t worry! It will all be explained in relatively plain terms.
Now that our table is a single column with 3 points, we can treat those points like they are points on a curve, and our column becomes a function. We can call the function we are creating from our column f. For f(x), our values for f are  f(1) = 2, f(2) = 4, and f(3) = 16. This matches with the points in our column: (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 16).
Since our function has some points, we can actually plot it on a graph!

For our use case, when we pick what kind of function we want to plot through our points, we use a quadratic equation. You might have flinched there. If I can resuscitate the 14-year-old out of your cerebellum, I’ll remind you that the quadratic equation is just a second-degree polynomial. In other words:
f(x) = a*x^2 + b*x + c
The reason we like to use a quadratic equation to describe our function is that our column has 3 points. As it turns out, there is 1 unique polynomial with degree d that passes through d+1 points. In other words, there is one unique quadratic equation (our function f) that can be used to represent our data points (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 16). If that doesn’t yet make sense, no worries, let’s use a simpler example and move up from there.
We can express this concept with simpler functions than the quadratic equation: namely, polynomials of highest-degree 1. These are also just called lines: f(x) = mx + b. An example of a line is f(x) = x + 1. I’m not overloading that term “line” with something more complicated, I’m literally just talking about lines, like the ones you can draw on paper. Anyway, a line is a degree-1 polynomial, because it could also be written as f(x) = x^1+1. See? The highest degree we are raising x to is 1, so it’s a degree-1 polynomial. Here’s our line plotted on a graph:

Okay, now we can explain everything we need to with lines. The main thing we need to understand is that in order to know which line we are drawing, we need two points. If we just have one point, we could draw infinitely many lines through that point. See this plot below to understand that:

As you can see, just writing down the point (0, 1) isn’t enough to know that we are dealing with the line f(x) = x + 1. In fact, it reveals nothing to us. We don’t have a clue which line we are supposed to draw! Once we add a second point, though, we go from infinitely many lines to only 1 single possible line. See below:

As the visual shows, 2 points is enough to represent a single unique line. This rule scales to all degrees of polynomials: for degree-2 functions, or quadratic equations, 3 points is enough to represent a unique quadratic equation, and for degree-3 functions, 4 points is enough, and so on… In our case, our table’s column has 3 points, so we can represent it with a unique quadratic equation (i.e., a degree-2 polynomial):
Values Column = (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 16)
f(x) = 5x^2 - 13x + 10
Verification:
f(1) = 5 \* 1^2 - 13 \* 1 + 10 = 2
f(2) = 5 \* 2^2 - 13 \* 2 + 10 = 4
f(3) = 5 \* 3^2 - 13 \* 3 + 10 = 16

These evaluations line up perfectly with our original table. You might be asking, how did you get that equation from our points? Good question! The answer is that I asked AI:

“Give me the unique quadratic equation that fits points (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 16).”

Easy! Seriously, though, there are a couple of methods by which you can do this by hand:
Polynomial interpolation. This is the way the zk pros actually create their unique polynomials from their data points. It is a mathematical technique that allows you to turn any set of n points into a unique n-1 degree polynomial.
Create a system of equations. This is another basic math concept that you may have learned long ago. Effectively, you turn your points into equations, and solve for your coefficients, i.e.:
a(1)2+b(1)+c=2
a(2)2+b(2)+c=4
a(3)2+b(3)+c=16
At any rate, you don’t need to know exactly how to construct these functions from the data points, but you should come out of this section with the understanding that once we have a table that represents the execution trace from our program, each column in that table can be converted to points, and all of the points in a column can then be converted to a single unique function using polynomial interpolation.

Step 5a. Establish our Constraints - High Level
Now that we have a function f(x) that uniquely fits our original points (1, 2), (2, 4), (3, 16), and therefore uniquely represents our original execution trace, we can get to the meat of our zk proving system.
Here’s the main part: the way by which we prove that our computation is valid (i.e., the 4th root of 16 = 2), is by convincing someone that our unique f(x) function satisfies certain properties. We do this by using points on our polynomial other than our original data. By doing this, the person we are proving to is convinced that the original data points are valid, and represent a valid execution trace, without ever being shown the original data points! Very zero-knowledge, indeed.
How do we do this? Well, it turns out that our original dataset, and consequently f(x), has a couple of important properties. The two properties are these:
For the rows in our original table, the value in a row is equal to the square of the value in the previous row. For example, f(2) = 4 = 2 \* 2 = f(1) \* f(1).
The value of the third row is 16 (our output). In other words, f(3) = 16.
If we can convince someone that we know a function f(x), such that for x = 1 and x = 2, f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x), and also convince them that f(3) = 16, they can follow these logical steps:
I am convinced that this person knows a unique degree-2 polynomial function f(x), where for x = 1 and x = 2,  f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x), and also where for x = 3, f(3) = 16.
Because I am convinced that for x = 1 and x = 2, f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x), I am convinced that f(3) = f(2) \* f(2) = f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) = f(1)^4. Therefore, I am convinced that f(1) is the 4th root of f(3).
Because I am convinced that for x = 3, f(3) = 16, I am convinced that f(1) is the 4th root of 16.
Because I am convinced that the prover knows what the polynomial function f is, I am convinced that they can use this function to compute any of its points, including f(1), and therefore they know f(1).
Since I am convinced this person knows f(1), I am convinced this person knows the fourth root of f(3) = 16.
And we’re done. This logical deduction does not require the verifier to ever see the value of f(1) or f(2). They just need to be convinced that this curve satisfies those two specific properties, and can deduce that the statement the prover is trying to prove is indeed true.
Step 5b. Establish our Constraints - Low Level
In order to convince our verifier that we know a function f(x) that satisfies those specific properties at x = 1, x = 2, and x = 3, so that they can follow the logical steps listed in the prior section, we need to convert those specific properties to constraints that hold true for every point in f(x), not just x = 1, x = 2, x = 3. This allows us to prove that our f(x) function has those properties without revealing our initial data points. This is the hardest section, even if it is all still middle school math, so bear with me.
Before we really get into it, we can talk about constraints a bit more. A constraint is a new equation that proves something about our original function and must hold for every point on our original function. Each of the popular zk proving systems deployed today uses different constraints, and the choice of constraints has a lot of impact on the proving system’s efficiency and trustlessness. Our system will have two constraints, each of which corresponds to the “properties” we were talking about in the last section:
f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x) = c(x)
f(x) - 16 = d(x)
I will explain why these look the way they do below. Both of these constraints are familiar in STARKs, and each actually has a name.
The first constraint is called a “transition constraint.” It represents the relationship between one row of our data and the next. To be more specific, in our case this means proving the relationship between f(x+1) and f(x), specifically that f(x+1) equals the square of f(x), just like how in our original data the value of the next row was the square of the previous one.
The second constraint is a “boundary constraint.” A boundary constraint represents the output of our program. In this case, our boundary constraint asserts that the output of our program is 16, i.e., f(3) = 16.
Now, we can get into the toughest bit.
Convincing them that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x)
We’ll work just on the first constraint now. Within our original data points, we can see that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x). For example, f(2) = 4 = 2 \* 2 = f(1) \* f(1), and f(3) = 16 = 4 \* 4 = f(2) \* f(2). Restating this, we can say that f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x) is zero when x = 1 and x = 2.
Well, this pattern holds for a couple of our points, but it doesn’t hold for every point. If we calculated f(4) on our function f(x), it wouldn’t equal f(3)^2 (you can verify this yourself with f(x), if you’d like). So how can we use that statement to prove something about every point on our function, not just those two? The answer is this: if we define a new function c(x), and say that c(x) = f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x), we can say that c(1) = 0, and c(2) = 0. This should make sense, since we know that when x = 1, c(1) = f(2) - f(1) \* f(1) = 4 - 2 \* 2 = 0, and when x = 2, c(2) = f(3) - f(2) \* f(2) = 16 - 4 \* 4 = 0. And if we know that c(1) = 0 and c(2) = 0, then we can say that 1 & 2 are zeroes of c(x).
What does it mean when a polynomial has zeroes? Once again, this should be dormant knowledge that we can extract from your brain. To do so, we can remind ourselves of a simple example. Let’s take the quadratic equation:
e(x) = x^2 - 5x + 6.
If we factor this polynomial, we get e(x) = (x - 3) \* (x - 2) as the factors of our polynomial. You can probably verify this yourself, or ask AI for a refresher. If (x - 3) is a factor of the polynomial, that means that 3 is a zero for that polynomial, and the same goes for (x - 2). Let’s try it out:
e(3) = 3^2 - 5 \* 3 + 6 = 9 - 15 + 6 = -6 + 6 = 0
Ok, now let’s steer things back to our c(x) function that we actually care about.
c(x) is a more complicated equation than the ones we’ve seen so far. This is because it contains the product of two polynomials, namely the f(x) \* f(x) part within c(x) =  f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x). If we tried to write out what c(x) is by plugging in the quadratic equation form of f(x), we would get:
c(x) =  (5\*(x+1)^2 - 13(x+1) + 10) - (5x^2 - 13x + 10) \* (5x^2 - 13x + 10)
f(x + 1)                               f(x)                          f(x)
And the evaluation of that expression ends up being:

c(x) =− 25\*x^4 + 130x^3 − 264x^2 + 257x − 98

That polynomial is too complicated for my liking, and I don’t want you to have to think about something like that either. We just need to understand a very simple thing about c(x):
c(1) = 0
c(2) = 0
It’s true! You’re free to verify this yourself by plugging in 1 & 2 as x-values to the fully-written form of c(x). Remember that even though c(x) looks ugly and complicated in its fully written-out form, it really is still just c(x) = f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x), which we know is zero for our x = 1 and x = 2. Now, since we know that c(1) = 0 and c(2) = 0, we know that (x - 1) and (x - 2) are both factors of c(x). So, we could rewrite c(x) in a simpler form:
c(x) = (x - 1) \* (x - 2) \* …
Where the … represents the rest of the factors of c(x). We don’t care about those other factors, so let’s just use a polynomial to represent them, called h(x).
c(x) = (x - 1) \* (x - 2) \* h(x)
h(x) just represents all the factors in c(x) besides (x - 1) and (x - 2) multiplied together. In modern zk proving systems, h(x) is called the quotient polynomial.
At this point we have our original f(x) function, plus a c(x) function that represents c(x) = f(x+1) - f(x)\*f(x), and finally a new h(x) function that represents all the factors of c(x) besides (x - 1) and (x - 2). Using these three things, we can actually prove what we need to prove! And here’s how:
Our verifier picks a random x value, we’ll call it z, that isn’t from any of our known x values x = 1, x = 2, or x = 3. As we mentioned earlier in the guide, this is the part where we use points outside of our original dataset.
The prover calculates f(z), f(z+1), c(z) and h(z) and gives those evaluations to the verifier. These evaluations are the zk proof.
The verifier validates that c(z) = f(z+1) - f(z) \* f(z).
The verifier validates that h(z) \* (z - 1) \* (z - 2) = c(z).
The verifier is convinced that f(x + 1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1, x = 2.
Wait, what? How? We can break this into logical steps to understand it better:
For Step 3: Remember that we defined c(x) as c(x) =  f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x). So it makes sense that for some random z, the equation c(z) = f(z+1) - f(z) \* f(z) will also hold. We’re just confirming what we expect c(x) to be for a random x. At this point, we have asserted that c(x) = f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x), although this doesn’t tell us anything useful about f(x) yet.
For Step 4: Now that we’ve validated that c(z) = f(z+1) - f(z) \* f(z), we then validate that c(z) = h(z) \* (z - 1) \* (z - 2). Why do we do this? Remember that if a polynomial contains a factor like (x - 1), it evaluates to zero at x = 1. So by saying that c(z) = h(z) \* (z - 1) \* (z - 2), we are saying that c(x) has factors (x - 1) and (x - 2). Further, by saying that c(x) has factors (x - 1) and (x - 2), we are saying that c(x) = 0 for x = 1 and c(x) = 0 for x = 2.
For Step 5: Finally, put these two steps together! We have shown that c(x) = f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x), and we have shown that c(x) = 0 for x = 1 and x = 2. The corollary of this is that f(x+1) - f(x) \* f(x) = 0, for x = 1 and x = 2. In other words, we have convinced the verifier that f(2) = f(1) \* f(1), and f(3) = f(2) \* f(2), which was the first property that we were trying to prove about f!!
And there we have it. We’ve used a random point z, evaluations of f(z), c(z), and h(z), and the values (z - 1) and (z - 2) to prove that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1 & x = 2, without having ever revealed f(1) or f(2). If you’ve understood this part, you’ve understood the most important bit of modern zk proving systems.
Convincing the verifier that f(3) = 16
If you’ve understood the first constraint that we had to prove, i.e., using c(x) to prove that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1 & x = 2, then this one should be a bit easier. Now that our verifier is convinced that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1 & x = 2, we want to convince our verifier of the second constraint, which is that f(3) = 16.
In order to convince them that f(3) = 16, we do something pretty similar to what we did before. We’ll define a new function, which is a lot like c(x). We’ll call this function d(x), and d(x) = f(x) - 16. Not too complicated, it’s just the value of f(x), minus 16. Do we know any points where d(x) might equal zero? We do. d(3) = f(3) - 16. And remember, f(3) = 16. Therefore, d(3) = f(3) - 16 = 16 - 16 = 0.
Okay, great, we have d(x) = f(x) - 16, and we know that d(3) = 0. What can we do with that?
Well, remember that if a polynomial equals zero for some number n, then that’s one of its zeroes, and therefore (x - n) is a factor of that polynomial. In our case, (x - 3) is a factor of d(x), so we could rewrite d(x) as:
d(x) = (x - 3) \* …
Where … is the rest of the factors of d(x). And just like the last section, we can rewrite the rest of the factors multiplied together as some polynomial, we’ll call it g(x). So:
d(x) = (x - 3) \* g(x)
g(x) is another quotient polynomial. At this point, you might even realize what we’re about to do. If we reuse that random number z from the last section, we can do this:
We calculate f(z), f(z+1), d(z) and g(z) for them. These evaluations are the rest of the zk proof.
They validate that d(z) = f(z) - 16.
They validate that g(z) \* (z - 3) = d(z).
Our verifier is convinced that f(3) = 16.
You might be a little less confused this time around. Still, we can break this one into logical steps as well:
We defined d(x) as d(x) =  f(x) - 16. So it makes sense that for some random z, d(z) = f(z) - 16. We’re just evaluating the equation at a random value. So, at this point, we have asserted that d(x) = f(x) - 16, although this doesn’t tell us anything useful about f(x) yet.
Now that we’ve validated that d(z) = f(z) - 16, we then validate that d(z) = g(z) \* (z - 3). Why do we do this? Remember that if a polynomial contains a factor like (x - 3), it evaluates to zero at x = 3. So by saying that d(z) = g(z) \* (z - 3), we are saying that d(x) has the factor (x - 3). Therefore, we are implicitly saying that d(x) = 0 for x = 3.
Now, put these two steps together! We have shown that d(x) = f(x) - 16, and we have shown that d(x) = 0 for x = 3. The corollary of this is that f(x) - 16 = 0 for x = 3. In other words, we have proven that f(3) = 16, which was the constraint we were trying to prove!!
And that’s it. Now that we have convinced our verifier that f(3) = 16, and that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1 and x = 2, our verifier can logically deduce that we know f(1) and f(1)^4 = f(3) = 16.
If they are convinced of those two things simultaneously, they will then put the whole thing together themselves through the logical steps we discussed before:
I am convinced that the prover knows a function f, where for x = 1 and x = 2, f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x). Therefore I am convinced that f(3) = f(2) \* f(2) = f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) = f(1)^4.
I am also convinced that for f, f(3) = 16.
Because I am convinced that the person knows this function, I am convinced that they know f(1).
Since I am convinced this person knows f(1), and since I am convinced that f(3) = f(2) \* f(2) = f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) \* f(1) = f(1)^4, I am convinced this person knows the fourth root of f(3) = 16.
At this point, we have gone through the entire proving and verifying flow. Our prover has converted their execution trace of the computation 2^4 = 16, generated a proof (the proof is all the requested evaluations for z: f(z), f(z+1), c(z), d(z), h(z), g(z), (z - 1), (z - 2), (z - 3)), and had that proof verified to convince someone that they know the 4th root of 16.
In the real proving systems, we aren’t just proving a couple of tiny constraints like this. We would be proving thousands, or millions, (or billions) of constraints. And all those constraints would add up to convince a verifier that we ran a complicated program on some secret inputs and produced some public outputs that we claim are valid. In Zippy ZK, all we did was prove we knew the 4th root of 16. But the system we used to do this scales from that teeny tiny little use case to much more complicated secret inputs and public outputs, like:
I can prove that when I run my ID (the secret input) through a machine learning program, it will detect that my age is 18 or above (the output).
I can prove that my bank account statement (secret input) contains a valid balance (the output) to take out a loan.
I can prove that my vote for the newest government elections (secret input) is a valid, unique vote (output), and in doing so I complete my civic duty in an incorruptible, anonymous way.
This simple system that we defined here can be scaled to handle some of the most important and interesting problems in privacy and governance, and if you understand this system, you now understand one of the best solutions to these problems.
Step 6. Commitment Schemes, and Where to Go from Here
Okay, it kind of felt like we were done there. Why is there another section?
Well, there is one final unresolved issue with our system, and I do need to discuss it. However, there isn’t really any good way to talk through it without leaving the middle school realm. If you don’t want to be bogged down by a slightly harder section, you’re free to stop here; I believe the above sections already provide a helpful foundational understanding of how these systems really work.
Okay, if you want to hear the rest of it, the last little issue is that our system is not yet secure against someone using a high-degree polynomial.
What does that mean? We showed that we hand our verifier all those evaluations of our functions at z we talked about: f(z), c(z), h(z), g(z), (z - 1), (z - 2), and (z - 3), and they can complete all the steps we talked about. In our system, our f(x) function was supposed to be a quadratic equation, or a degree-2 polynomial. So as long as we’re only sticking to degree-2 polynomials, we can’t cheat our verifier. As we explained before, there is only a single unique quadratic equation that we can use in our proving system to prove that we know the 4th root of 16: f(x) = 5x^2 - 13x + 10. This also makes some intuitive sense: our constraints described 3 unique points: f(3), and f(1) & f(2). Therefore, we should expect one single degree-2 polynomial to uniquely define those constraints.
However, what if our prover tried using a degree-3 polynomial? It turns out there are infinitely many degree-3 polynomials that can be used to falsely prove the 4th root of 16. Here are a few:
f(x)= x^3 − 2x^2 − 2x + 4
f(x)= x^3 − 3x^2 − 8x + 8
f(x)= 4x^3 − 4x^2 + 5x
And so on… It’s just like that analogy we had with drawing infinitely many lines through the single point. Once we add an extra degree to our function, we can no longer uniquely identify a polynomial (and consequently an execution trace) with our current points or constraints.
This is a critical issue, and is the final problem we must solve in our proving system. The solution that is used by all of the popular proving systems today is a polynomial commitment scheme.
A polynomial commitment scheme is a mathematical technique used to ensure that the points we are handing over to our verifier are really from a polynomial of the degree they expect. In our case, our verifier needs to be sure we are giving them points from a quadratic equation, or a degree-2 polynomial (except for c(x), which is degree-4).
These commitment schemes are all really complicated. But they can be conceptualized using a very simple protocol:
The prover “commits to their polynomial.” This means they put their polynomial into the equivalent of a secret box.
This secret box is special. It won’t allow anything to enter it that isn’t a polynomial with the required degree. For our use case, our secret box only accepts degree-2 polynomials.
The verifier asks that we “reveal” a point on the polynomial’s curve.
We let them do that, and they pull that point out of the secret box. Because they pulled that point out of the secret box, they know that the point comes from a valid degree-2 polynomial.
And that’s it. They do everything they do in the prior 5 sections, with just a slight modification to accommodate the use of the commitment scheme:
The prover commits to functions f, c, h, d, and g.
Our verifier picks a random point, z.
We pull out points f(z), f(z+1), c(z), h(z), d(z), g(z) from the secret commitment box for them.
They validate that c(z) = f(z+1) - f(z) \* f(z).
They validate that h(z) \* (z - 1) \* (z - 2) = c(z).
Our verifier is convinced that f(x + 1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1, x = 2.
They validate that d(z) = f(z) - 16.
They validate that g(z) \* (z - 3) = d(z).
Our verifier is convinced that f(3) = 16.
Now that we have convinced our verifier that f(3) = 16, and that f(x+1) = f(x) \* f(x) for x = 1 and x = 2, our verifier can logically deduce that we know f(1) and f(1)^4 = f(3) = 16.
All done!
Now that you’ve gotten through this, you can start to deepen your knowledge on each individual key subject discussed here:
Execution traces
Arithmetization
Polynomial interpolation & the Schwartz-Zippel Lemma
Reed-Solomon Encoding
Constraints
Polynomial Commitment Schemes
FRI
KZG
End-to-end proving systems:
Groth16
PLONK
STARK